<!DOCTYPE BOOK PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook V4.0//EN" [
]>
<book lang="en-gb">
<bookinfo>
<title>The !Family Screenbook</title>
<releaseinfo>Version 2.25</releaseinfo>
Last Updated <date>2000-12-19</date>
<authorgroup>
<author>
<firstname>Andy</firstname>
<surname>Waddington</surname>
</author>
<affiliation>
<address><email>family-maint/at/nospam.pennine.demon.co.uk</email></address>
</affiliation>
</authorgroup>
<copyright><year>2000</year> <holder>Andy Waddington</holder></copyright>

<abstract>
<para>
A tutorial guide to !Family - a Genealogy database (GEDCOM) editor and
browser for the RISC OS desktop
</para>
</abstract>
</bookinfo>

Principal Developers: Denis Howe, Andy Waddington

<para>
This screenbook describes !Family version 2.25, though the screen shots
are a mixture of !Family 2.24 and X!Family 0.11. Some features are mentioned
which are not yet implemented, and the !Family user interface is evolving
towards that of X!Family (hence the mix of screenshots). This will all get
less confusing as the interfaces stabilise over the next few months.
</para>

Table of Contents
1. Introduction

2. The main display window

3. The Person editing dbox

4. The Family Event editing dbox

5. The Preferences dbox

6. Searching for a person: Name completion dbox

7. Miscellaneous dboxes

Appendix A. F.A.Q. list

Appendix B. GEDCOM files

Appendix C. Obtaining, Installing, Compiling, Porting !Family

<chapter id="intro">
<title>!Family Chapter 1. Introduction</title>

<para>!Family is an editor for Genealogy (Family Tree) Databases working
directly with the internationally standardised GEDCOM file format. It
has an intuitive visual interface using which details of families, people
and events can be browsed and edited directly on a graphical view of the
family tree. It has evolved from Dennis Howes' !Family, a BASIC program
for RISC OS computers which is great to use, but getting very slow on old
machines with a big database.</para>

<para>!Family will be rewritten in C++ shortly (a version for Linux using the
FLTK toolkit is already running with limited editing capability). Using a
compiled language will make it much faster than an interpreted one. !Family
is released under the GNU General Public License. See Appendix C for details
on obtaining the latest versions of !Family (or X!Family and FLTK),
compiling, porting and installing.</para>

Alpha Release Software

<para>At present, !Family is fairly mature, but is still undergoing
development. At any time you should be able to obtain a well-tested and
stable "release" version, and an up-to-the-minute, but potentially unstable
development version. Shortly, you should expect to see two more versions for
RISCOS - a stable compiled C++ program (faster than the BASIC one, but
initially with rather limited functionality) and the alpha testing version of
the development C++ code. The BASIC versions are not crunched, so effectively
come with source. The C++ versions will have separate source and binary
releases.</para>

<para>Currently (2000-12-19) the alpha development version of the BASIC
!Family is being used to develop the Templates for use with the C++ program,
so the user interface is changing somewhat. Expect the C++ version to appear
very similar to the alpha BASIC version, but run faster and use somewhat less
memory.</para>

</chapter>

<chapter id="mainui">
<title>!Family Chapter 2. The Main display window</title>

<sect1 id="0200">
<para>When started, !Family opens two windows, showing the currently loaded
tree (if any) and a smaller window with notes associated with the "Current
Person". If no tree was loaded, the main window will be blank and no notes
window will be opened.</para>

<para>The tree displayed is based on the concept of "the current person", and
the current person is recorded whenever a file is saved from the program. The
tree will ideally show the current person, his parents, siblings, and all
descendants. If he exists in the database, the person at the "top" of the
tree will be the current person's father. Failing that, it will be his
mother, and if neither of these exist in the database, it will be the current
person him- or herself. The title bar of the window shows the name of the
GEDCOM file .</para>

<para>If you left-click on a person, then that person will become the new
current person, and the tree is redisplayed based on that person. So that
as long as the current person has one or both parents in the database,
you can keep on clicking on the top person to go back a generation. This
soon makes the tree too big for the screen, and the window becomes scrollable
to see all the people on display.</para>

<para>The display shows males in blue, females in red, and those whose gender
is unknown in green. With the default options set, under each person will
be a pair of dates representing birth and death. If a birth date is unknown,
it is marked "?", but if a death date is unknown, it is simply left blank.
The person may be still alive !</para>

<para>Husband and wife are shown one above the other, with at least an equals
sign between them. If a marriage date is known (and the option to display
these dates is set) then that date will be shown next to the equals sign. For
multiple marriages by one person, each marriage is marked by either a date,
or, if this is not known, or not being shown, then a sequence number.</para>

<para>If a person's spouse is unknown, but they have descendants, the equals
sign is still shown, but there is a gap where the spouse would be. Below
each married couple, their descendants are shown, linked by lines in the
conventional manner. If the descendants are married, the process is
repeated down to the most recent known issue.</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="0201">
<title>2.1 "Person" menu</title>

<sect2 id="0201intro">
<para>If you click menu on a person shown on the tree, a small menu will pop
up with the person's name as the title. The top item, "Edit" opens a tabbed
dbox which enables you to edit the person's event details (Birth,
Christening, Baptism, Death, Cremation, Burial) - see Edit Person Dbox for
full details.</para>

<para>The next group of items "Marry", "Unmarry", "Child", "Older" and
"Remove" are for manipulating the structure of the tree.</para>

</sect2>

<sect2 id="0201marry">
<title>Marry</title>

<para>Will prompt for a name of a person to marry. That name may be one
already in the database, in which case the two people will be connected, or
it may be a name not in the database, in which case the individual will be
created. This gives lots of scope for creating new people when you didn't
mean to by misspelling the name slightly, or for marrying to someone with the
same name as the spouse you wanted to create. The "name matching" feature is
used to overcome these potential problems, but the implementation details
have not yet been sorted, so the manual doesn't describe these
details.</para>

</sect2>

<sect2 id="0201unmarry">
<title>UnMarry</title>
<para>Is used to remove a marriage, when a mistake has been made. The submenu
lists possible spouses of the person in the main menu - select one and click
to remove that marriage. If the marriage had issue, the children will remain
as issue of one spouse, and you will need to use the Edit person dbox on
those children to change the names of Mother and/or Father to place them as
offspring of another pair of parents.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="0201child">
<title>Child</title>
<para>This will pop up an Edit person dbox with the relevant parent filled
in. For example, if you clicked on a male, and chose "Child", the Edit
Person dbox would show a new person, with the "Father" field filled in
with the name of the person you first clicked on. The mother field would
be blank. If you fill this name in with one of the father's spouses in
the database, then the child is added to that marriage. If you leave the
field blank, a new family (with an unknown mother) will be created.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="0201older">
<title>Older</title>
<para>Will only be available when a person has older siblings. Clicking this
will make this person older than the sibling immediately to the left.
[Technical note: Siblings are displayed in the order in which they are
defined in the FAM object of the GEDCOM file, which is independant of the
actual dates of birth which may be recorded. Clicking "older" swaps the
order of the CHIL tags, it doesn't change any dates of birth.]</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="0201remove">
<title>Remove</title>
<para>The person clicked on will be removed from the database, along with
all his or her details. All references to the person will also be removed,
which means that it can be quite a lot of work to add a person deleted in
error back into the tree !</para>
</sect2>

<para>One more menu item currently appears in this menu, "Marriage". This
leads to a submenu listing possible spouses, and clicking on one will
open a dbox dealing with events affecting the family, rather than the
individual, such as engagement, marriage and divorce. It is intended that
this menu item will move to a different pop-up menu shortly. See
Family Events Dbox for full details.</para>

<para>The final item on the pop-up menu is "Reports" which opens a submenu
listing possible reports you can generate based on the person you clicked
on. Currently the only item on this submenu is "Ancestors". It is intended
that clicking this will generate a condensed ahnentafel showing all known
direct ancestors of this person, and then prompt for a place to save the
file. Currently, however, the code to do this is not yet implemented.</para>

</sect1>

<sect1 id="0202">
<title>2.2 Family menu</title>

<para>If you right-click on the equals sign, date or sequence number of a
marriage, a small menu will pop up showing the id-number of the FAM object as
title. [Aside: if you don't know the internals of GEDCOM files, think of this
number as just a unique identifier for a particular family. To know more
about the GEDCOM, see Appendix B.]</para>

<para>The first two items on this menu, "Edit" and "Notes" fulfill similar
fucntions to the items of the same name on the Person menu. "Edit" opens a
tabbed dbox which enables you to edit the event details associated with the
family (currently Engagement, Marriage and Divorce) - see Family Events Dbox
for full details. "Notes" open a small text-editor window containing
free-text notes about the family which can be edited, or cut-and-pasted to
other applications.</para>

<para>The second group of menu items "Earlier", "Unmarry" and "Child" are
again for manipulating the structure of the tree.</para>

<sect2 id="0202earlier">
<title>Earlier</title>
<para>Will only be available when a person is shown with more than one family
on the current tree view, and marriage clicked on is not the earliest, as
shown on the view. Clicking this item will swap the order of this family
and the one immediately to its left. [Technical note: Families are displayed
in the order in which they are defined in the INDI object of the GEDCOM file,
which is independant of the actual dates of marriage which may be recorded.
Clicking "earlier" swaps the order of the FAMS tags, it doesn't change any
recorded dates.]</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="0202unmarry">
<title>Unmarry</title>
<para>This is to remove the FAM object defining a marriage. If there are no
descendants, this is straightforward. If descendants are listed for a
family, the program will currently assume that they should remain
connected to the father, which means that the mother is detached from
the marriage, but the FAM object still exists. Children can be detached
from a parent using the Edit Person dbox. It
is recognised that this mechanism is a little cumbersome, but it should
only be needed to correct major mistakes, and thus pretty rarely.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="0202child">
<title>Child</title>
<para>This will pop up an Edit person dbox with both parents filled in, so
that the new child whose details you enter will be added to the relevant
family. A new child is always added to the right of existing siblings, as if
the youngest. Normally this is OK, as you would add children in that order
when putting data into the database. If you discover another child later, or
discover that one originally added as the youngest needs to be moved up, you
can use the "Older" item on the person menu as noted in section 2.1
above.</para>
</sect2>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="0203">
<title>2.3 Iconbar menu</title>

<para>The iconbar menu has some standard entries, such as Info=&gt; and Quit,
which are pretty much familiar and self-explanatory. It will shortly get a
"Help" menu item, which will lead into this manual. Most of the other items
are concerned with generating various forms of report:</para>

<sect2 id="0203print">
<title>Print</title>
<para>This will attempt to print the currently displayed tree via the
installed printer driver. Multiple pages will be used, as needed. The method
used tries to minimise the number of sheets of paper used, but once that has
been determined, it tries to maximise the overlap between pages, to make
joining them up easier.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="0203choices">
<title>Choices</title>
<para>This opens a dbox to configure the detailed behaviour of the program.
See The Preferences dbox. Actually, in !Family,
most of these choices are set in submenus of the iconbar menu, and only
the choice "misc..." opens a dbox, but this is intended to change to a
somewhat friendlier interface.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="0203reset">
<title>Reset</title>
<para>Clicking this will discard the tree currently displayed. You will be
warned if the data are unsaved and offered a chance to save the file.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="0203report">
<title>Report</title>
<para>Opens a saveas dbox. Dragging the icon somewhere will produce a text
file listing everything known about every individual in the tree.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="0203ancestors">
<title>Ancestors</title>
<para>Opens a saveas dbox. Dragging the icon somewhere will produce a text
file listing all known ancestors in a direct line back from the current
person. Note that the current person is almost at the top of the tree on the
display, but will be at the bottom of the tree in this file.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="0203families">
<title>Families</title>
<para>Opens a saveas dbox. Dragging the icon somewhere will produce a text
file listing all the family groups defined in the tree, with details of
family events, parents and issue.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="0203draw">
<title>Draw</title>
<para>Opens a saveas dbox. Dragging the icon somewhere will produce a !Draw
file of the current display, using the font and scale settings defined in
the Choices submenu. Drawing a tree is a complicated business, and you may
find that you can get a more compact and neater output by saving to a draw
file and manipulating the drawing yourself, rather than just using "Print"
directly. The developer finds that with really big trees (back twenty or
so generations) this can save a lot of paper ! It can also be useful if
you want to merge two ancestral lines onto one diagram.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="0203webpages">
<title>Web pages</title>
<para>Opens a dbox with a saveas icon. This is intended to generate an html
(browsable) structure to put up on a website so that others can browse your
tree without needing genealogical software. You can drag html files to the
two load targets at the top of the dbox, for adding things like logos, or
navigation to other pages on your site. Ticking the box "omit details of
persons flagged as living" will do just that - all dates and places relating
to people for whom the "Living" option is ticked in the Edit person dbox will
be suppressed. Note that this is implemented through the "LVG" tag, which
though used by several genealogical products, is not part of the GEDCOM
Specification. I'm not sure that !Family's implementation is the same as
other programs', but the net effect is fine in this context.</para>

<para>If you have RISC OS 4, or fewer than 75 people in your tree, you can
ignore the warning about image filing systems. Otherwise, you need to be
aware that !Family will generate a file for each person in your tree, as
well as an index page, and something like x-files, rafs or !SparkFS will
be needed which supports more than 77 files per directory.</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="0203save">
<title>Save</title>
<para>The final item simply allows you to drag the GEDCOM icon to save your
whole tree in the standard GEDCOM file format.</para>
</sect2>

</sect1>
</chapter>

<chapter id="editperson">
<title>!Family Chapter 3. Edit Person dbox</title>

<para>Clicking menu on a person in the main window brings up a menu:
</para>


<para>Choosing "Edit" or "Child" from this menu will open a tabbed dbox in
which details of a person's main life events can be entered.</para>

<para>From the point of view of a genealogist, often doing research in civil
vital records or church records, the main events in a life are birth,
marriage and death, simply because these are the only ones recorded in
documents readily obtained today. Of these, marriage affects two people and
is not an event of a single life. Birth and death are associated (and may
only be recorded as) christenings, baptisms, cremations and burials, and
these are the six events currently handled by this dbox. GEDCOM has
established tags for a whole host of other life events, and a generic "event"
tag for anything else occurring to a person's life on a specific date or
within a range of dates. !Family preserves this information in your GEDCOM,
but doesn't currently support displaying or editing it.</para>

<para>The first two text fields are Name and Title, which identify this
person. Title is optional, and is typically an indication of civil or
military rank, usually the final rank achieved during life.</para>



<para>A single check box "Living" can be set to show that a person is
believed to be alive on the date the database is being edited. Strictly
speaking the tag used to record this is not a part of the GEDCOM standard,
but seems to be widely used by a number of genealogy packages. If a proper
way of indicating this status is defined in some future version of GEDCOM,
this part of the user-interface may change to reflect this.</para>

<para>A line of three radio buttons defines the gender of this person as
male, female or unknown.</para>

<para>Two text fields give the names of the parents. Filling in these fields
enables the person to be placed correctly in the structure of the family
tree. If the parents are already in the database, they must be spelt exactly
as they already appear in order to connect the new person correctly. If the
dbox was opened as a result of choosing "Child" in a person or family pop-up
menu, then they should already be filled in correctly. Getting the spelling
wrong here would result in the creation of new people in the database, and
it might possibly be some time before the error became apparent. To avoid
this when the dbox is opened without these names filled in, name completion
or matching is available to enable you to choose from a list of people
already in the database. Type the start of the relevant person's name and hit
"F1", or the end of the name and hit "F2". If only one person matches, that
name will be filled in. If no-one matches, you will hear a beep. If there
are multiple matches, a window will open with a list, showing birth/death
dates to aid identification of the person you want. The name you typed may
also be partially completed as far as can be deduced from the list. Click
on one name in the list to fill in the field, or type some more in the
original writable icon and hit "F1" or "F2" again.</para>



<para>Below these fields are the six tabs for events. Clicking on a tab
brings it to the front, so that the fields may be filled in. In all cases,
these fields include a date and time, a place (down to the level of town or
village) and a site (down to the level of street, building or burial ground,
for example). The division between "place" and "site" is somewhat arbitrary,
and in the most recent version of GEDCOM, seems to have been abolished
entirely in favour of a more structured form of the "place" specifier. It is
intended to change the way in which !Family saves these fields to fit in with
the newer usage, whilst still retaining the ability to read the old forms.
Below the "Date" field is a choice of radio buttons to choose the calendar in
which the date is defined. The default is "Gregorian", and at present the
only other form allowed is "Julian", which is appropriate for dates in the
English-speaking world prior to 1752. GEDCOM also defines "French R",
"Hebrew", "Roman" and "Unknown", and these will be added to !Family's
repertoire at some stage. Currently these present a problem if the option to
present dates in ISO-8601 format has been chosen.</para>

<para>The "Death" and "Burial" tabs each have one additional field. Death can
have a "Cause", typically that recorded on a death certificate for modern
deaths. "Burial" can be specified down to the level of "Plot". Again, in
versions 5.4 and 5.5 of GEDCOM, this detail has been subsumed into the
"Place" tag, but !Family will continue to be able to read the "SITE",
"CEME" and "PLOT" tags as specified in GEDCOM 5.3.</para>

<para>A last field within the tab is labelled "Sources" and currently shows
the cross-reference id used in any SOUR tag for the event. This is the first
stage of adding the ability to handle source citations to !Family.</para>



<para>Finally there are three buttons "Help" (which should bring you to this
help page), "Cancel" and "OK". "Cancel" throws away any changes you have
made and closes the dbox (clicking on its "close" icon will do likewise).
If the dbox was opened from "Child" or "New..." menu items to create a new
person in the database, then that person is not created. If the dbox was
opened from "Edit", then the person continues to exist unchanged in the
database.</para>

<para>Clicking "OK" saves the changes, creating a new person in the database
if necessary. Note that if you have changed the names of one or both
parents, the person may also be moved about the structure, and potentially,
new database entries may be created for those parents. This feature is
useful when entering a database following research further back into the
past. Editing a person to add parents' names creates those parents, who
in turn may be edited to add their parents, and so on, as far back as your
research goes. On the other hand, don't try to change the name of a
parent this way - if a parent's name is not in the database, then that person
is created. Changing the Father's name for one child of a family in this
dbox, for example, will create a new father, a new marriage and move this
child into a new family, leaving the others with the same parents as before.
Probably not what you intended. Changing someone's name needs to be done in
the Edit Person dbox for that person.</para>

</chapter>

<chapter id="familyui">
<title>!Family Chapter 4. Family event dbox</title>

<para>Clicking menu over a marriage and choosing Edit from the pop-up menu
[!Family will work this way shortly, but doesn't yet, the screen shot shows
the current UI, click menu on a person and choose a spouse from the marriage
submenu:]:</para>



<para>Choose "Edit" to get a dialogue which displays date and place of
marriage.</para>



<para>You can see, enter, or change the date, time and place of the
marriage (but not the names of the people involved). Clicking on
the engagement tab gives a similar dialogue with a date and time
(the latter perhaps not very meaningful) for the engagement.</para>

<para>For those marriages which ended in a divorce, the final tab lets you
edit the date and time of this. A place is not meaningful in most cases,
unless you consider that this is the court which issued the final decree.
However, that would usually be defined by the supporting documentation.</para>

<para>Clicking "Cancel" closes the dialogue without saving any changes made.
Typically you would do this if you had opened the dialogue just to read
the details. Clicking "OK" saves the current details back into the database.
Clicking "Help" brings up this screenbook page in your current help system.</para>

</chapter>

<chapter id="prefui">!Family Chapter 5. The preferences dbox

<para>At present most of the configuration is done through menus. This will
change to more resemble the dbox system used under Linux by X!Family. At
present just one preferences dbox operates in !Family:</para>



<para>These are X!Family screenshots, whih show the general style towards
which the !Family UI is moving. Proper ones and some explanation for the RISC
OS !Family preferences will follow soon, but as the interface is shortly
going to change, I'm waiting to write a manual page until the interface has
stabilised.</para>

<para>The first of the X!Family screenshots shows the tabbed version of the
!Family miscellaneous preferences dbox. The !Family style will be tabbed like
this, though the icons will be more as the RISC OS style above.</para>



<para>The Names config tab will control how names are displayed on the main
window and on printed trees. The X!Family screenshot shows what fields will
appear, but again the style will be more RISC OS in !Family.</para>



<para>The dates config tab will control which dates are shown on the tree,
and in which style.</para>

</chapter>

<appendix>!Family Appendix B. GEDCOM files

<para>The following description is adapted from Dennis Howes' original Help
file for !Family:</para>

<para>GEDCOM (Genealogical Data Communication) is the de facto international
standard for genealogical data, specified by Mormon church. Genealogical
databases for personal computers use the "Lineage-linked form", though
the basic grammar supports other forms. This is the form used as its native
database by !Family.</para>

<para>If you look up "Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" in your
'phone book you may find a "Family History Centre" listed. There you can
search gigabytes of genealogical data on CDROM, copy bits to a file in GEDCOM
format, bring it home on floppy disc, and load it into X!Family. Some of this
information (in particular, the International Genealogical Index) is also
available online at www.familysearch.org, the main LDS website, and can be
downloaded in GEDCOM format.</para>

<para>GEDCOM files are actually plain ASCII. It is not necessary to
understand their format but the following explanation is included for the
curious. Each line describes an object and is of the form</para>

  level [@id@] tag value

<para>where level is a number. Objects at level n are sub-objects of those at
level n-1. The top-level (0) objects are things like individuals (tag =
"INDI") and families (tag = "FAM"). Individuals have sub-objects with
tags like NAME, BIRT, DEAT, FAMS and FAMC. A FAMS object has a value like
@F12@ which is a cross-reference to a (level 0) FAM object with id = F12.
This is a family in which the individual is a spouse (or parent). A FAMC
object also has a cross-reference to a FAM object for a family in which the
person is a child. FAM objects have HUSB, WIFE and CHIL sub-objects whose
values are cross-references back to individuals. Here is an example. The
comments after the semicolons ";" in the following are not part of the
GEDCOM, and would not be in a real GEDCOM file:</para>


0 @I1@ INDI      ; An individual
1 NAME John      ;  called John
1 FAMC @F1@      ;  is a child in family F1
0 @I2@ INDI
1 NAME David     ; David
1 FAMS @F1@      ;  is a parent in F1
0 @I3@ INDI
1 NAME Mary      ; Mary
1 FAMS @F1@      ;  is a parent in F1
0 @F1@ FAM       ; Family F1 includes
1 HUSB @I2@      ;  David, the father
1 WIFE @I3@      ;  Mary, the mother
1 CHIL @I1@      ;  John, a child


<para>The GEDCOM standard defines many more tags than are used by !Family.
Objects which are not recognised are not displayed but are preserved when the
file is saved (unlike some genealogy software, which simply throws away
information it doesn't understand). For full details of GEDCOM, write
to</para>

   gedcom@gedcom.org

   GEDCOM Coordinator
   Family History Department
   50 East North Temple
   Salt Lake City UT 84150
   USA


<para>A technical description of the grammar of GEDCOM, along with all the
tags defined in the current version (5.5 at the time of writing) can be
found at GENDEX.</para>

<para>Although GEDCOM files can be edited with an ordinary text editor, this
requires considerable care to avoid entries which are inconsistent with
each other, particularly cross-references between families and their members.
If you frequently find yourself editing a GEDCOM manually, please let the
X!Family developer know at family-maint/at/nospam.pennine.demon.co.uk, and
the features you need supported will be considered for inclusion in future
releases.</para>

<para>Some PC programs (eg. Legacy and Win-Family) require GEDCOM lines to
end with carriage return. Following the standard, !Family ends them with line
feed and accepts any combination of CR and LF. Use a text editor or other
tool to change LF to CR if you must use broken software.</para>
 
<para>!Family understands the basic grammar of GEDCOM files, but only
supports a subset of the tags. Anything it doesn't understand is preserved
(unlike some genealogy software which simply discards those bits). If you
import a GEDCOM file conforming to an old version, and modify it with
!Family, which is mainly based on the 5.3 revision (but uses some tags first
defined at 5.4), you may end up with a GEDCOM which contains a mix of
features from recent versions, and old features no longer supported by some
Genealogy programs. For example, Personal Ancestral File 4.03 will import
GEDCOM 4.0 files and GEDCOM 5.5 files, converting everything to 5.5, but
doesn't understand some tags from the 5.3 version, which it simply moans
about at length, then discards. Keeping your databases in !Family will
guarantee not to throw away any data, no matter what GEDCOM revision your
base data conform to.</para>

</appendix>

<colophon>!Family Screenbook endpiece

<para>That's all there is at the moment. Quite a lot of this manual remains
to be written for two reasons:</para>


<para>Manuals often lag behind the software, because often the design of
software changes in the light of feedback from users of alpha and beta-test
versions. Manuals written at the same time as the software specification are
like battle plans written before first contact with the enemy, and can bear
little or no relation to reality. In fact, this manual is better than most
because it describes some of the functionality which has yet to be added to
the code. Writing the manual is a form of feedback from the design process
which helps identify some problems before first contact with real users.
There is, however, always a high likelihood that the user interface of the
released program will differ from what was originally written here.</para>


<para>Some quite large areas of intended functionality have not yet been
designed at all. Currently, those aspects of the code which emulate or
replace the functionality of the RISC OS !Family program have mostly been
designed, but parts of the interface which are intended to address various
perceived inadequacies of !Family are subject to periodic radical rethink,
and will require prolonged productive use of the software to see what needs
to be done.</para>


<para>It is hoped to continue the process of co-evolving the manual with the
software so that all the functionality in the product is documented, before
or very soon after it is implemented. Don't worry - unlike many programmers,
I enjoy writing documentation !</para>


</colophon>

Andy Waddington, December 2000

</book>